---
clir_id: pub73
layout: publication
title: "Public Libraries, Communities, and Technology: Twelve Case Studies"
authors: "Council on Library Resources"
pub_date: 1996-11-01
html_only: true
notes: "TODO: There is a PDF in ERIC; only Brooklyn Public Library case study was ported"
pages: 126
isbn:
eric: ED403912
subjects: Case Studies, Community Services, Information Technology, Library Automation, Library Cooperation, Library Extension, Library Facilities, Library Planning, Library Role, Library Services, Public Libraries, Users (Information)
description: "The advisory committee overseeing the studies documented in this report looked for the following: models for emulation, examples of both large and small libraries, projects that have been implemented, programs with community impact, technologically sophisticated programs, successful or significant investments that should be highlighted, programs that encourage diversity, collaboration among libraries and community organizations, and projects that are coordinated and integrated within the overall library program. This report was supported by a grant from the W.K. Kellogg Foundation."
files:
  - pub73.pdf
---

- [Public Library Case Studies](#public-library-case-studies)
- [About Public Libraries, Communities, and Technology — Twelve Case Studies](#about-public-libraries-communities-and-technology--twelve-case-studies)
- [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
    - [Case Studies](#case-studies)
- [Introduction to the Public Libraries, Communities, and Technology Project](#introduction-to-the-public-libraries-communities-and-technology-project)
- [Twelve Case Studies: Analysis](#twelve-case-studies-analysis)
  - [Analysis of the Case Studies](#analysis-of-the-case-studies)
  - [The Case Studies-General Observations](#the-case-studies-general-observations)
  - [Serving Communities](#serving-communities)
  - [Need for Vision](#need-for-vision)
  - [Common Values](#common-values)
  - [Evolving Roles](#evolving-roles)
  - [The Challenge of Partnerships](#the-challenge-of-partnerships)
  - [Libraries and Community-based Information Networks](#libraries-and-community-based-information-networks)
  - [Staffing and Training](#staffing-and-training)
  - [The Need for Buildings and Space](#the-need-for-buildings-and-space)
  - [Conclusions](#conclusions)
- [Case Studies](#case-studies-1)
  - [Brooklyn Public Library Case Study](#brooklyn-public-library-case-study)
    - [The Context](#the-context)
    - [Accomplishments](#accomplishments)
    - [Technology](#technology)
      - [Learning and Technology](#learning-and-technology)
      - [Technology Directions](#technology-directions)
      - [Serving the Community through Branches](#serving-the-community-through-branches)
      - [Technical Infrastructure](#technical-infrastructure)
    - [Challenges](#challenges)
      - [The Future](#the-future)


# Public Library Case Studies

* * *

# About Public Libraries, Communities, and Technology — Twelve Case Studies

CLIR is interested in addressing the challenges public libraries face in an era of information revolution and the implications of these challenges for the education of the library profession. With a grant from the W.K. Kellogg Foundation, it has established a program to take a closer look at public libraries and determine the most useful avenues for developing leaders, building networks within the library and information science communities, and strengthening the dialog among the people who use and support public libraries.

Within this Kellogg program, CLIR has gathered information on public libraries that have developed particularly innovative services, that use emerging technologies to serve the local community, or that have been influential in addressing public policy for information services in their communities. In the long term, CLIR plans to use the information gathered to guide the development of programs that will enhance library leadership.

Supported by a grant from the W.K. Kellogg Foundation.

# Table of Contents

*   [Introduction to the Public Libraries, Communities, and Technology Project](https://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/case/intro/)
*   [Analysis of the Case Studies](https://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/case/analysis/)

### Case Studies

*   [Brooklyn Public Library](https://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/case/broo/), Brooklyn, New York
*   [Broward Public Library](https://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/case/brow/), Fort Lauderdale, Florida
*   [Camden County Library](https://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/case/camd/), Voorheen, New Jersey
*   [Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh](https://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/case/carn/), Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
*   [Cedar Falls Public Library](https://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/case/ceda/), Cedar Falls Iowa
*   [Cleveland Public Library](https://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/case/clev/), Cleveland, Ohio
*   [Georgetown County Library](https://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/case/geor/), Georgetown, South Carolina
*   [Jefferson-Madison Regional Library](https://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/case/jeff/), Charlottesville, Virginia
*   [Livingston County Library](https://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/case/livi/),Chillicothe, Missouri
*   [Mid-Peninsula Library Cooperative](https://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/case/midp01/), Iron Mountain, Michigan
*   [Public Library of Charlotte and Mecklenburg County](https://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/case/plcm/), Charlotte, North Carolina
*   [Seattle Public Library](https://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/case/seat/), Seattle, Washington

**Appendices**

*   [Letter to Public Libraries, June 2, 1995](https://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/case/lett/)
*   [Selected Library Statistics](https://www.clir.org/pubs/reports/case/stats/)

# Introduction to the Public Libraries, Communities, and Technology Project

For more than 40 years the Council on Library Resources has identified library issues and developed new approaches to library operations. As a non-profit, operating foundation, the Council serves as a catalyst for programs in library leadership development, as well as the economics of information and the development of the digital library. Recently, the Council has been interested in addressing the challenges public libraries face in an era of information revolution and the implications of these challenges for the education of the library profession. At the same time, the W.K. Kellogg Foundation has taken a keen interest in the roles public libraries are playing in their communities and how public library leadership is being developed for the future. Through its Human Resources for Information Systems Management (HRISM) program, the Kellogg Foundation is developing the leaders who can build and manage the information support systems needed by society and is assisting current library leaders in transforming their institutions in response to changing societal needs. A grant to the Council on Library Resources by the Kellogg Foundation established a program to take a closer look at public libraries and determine the most useful avenues for developing leaders, building networks within the library and information science communities, and strengthening the dialogue among the people who use and support public libraries.

Within its Kellogg program, the Council is gathering information on public libraries that have developed particularly innovative services, that use emerging technologies to serve the local community, or that have been influential in addressing public policy for information services in their communities. The Council will use this information to produce publications intended to encourage and guide library directors, and to inform community leaders about the dynamic roles that public libraries and information technology can play within communities. In the longer term, the Council will use the information gathered about public libraries to guide the development of programs that will enhance library leadership.

Working with an Advisory Committee of public library directors, the Council’s staff decided that the best way to learn was through direct communication with library leaders and staff. Council President Deanna Marcum sent a letter to more than 3,000 public libraries with acquisition budgets of over $10,000 to identify innovative uses of technology, especially those applications of technology used to meet community information needs. This June 2, 1995, letter asked library directors to write a paragraph summarizing local programs. A copy of the letter follows this introduction.

The Council received 293 letters in response from public libraries in 46 states (all but Rhode Island, Tennessee, Mississippi, and Nevada). Responses came from small libraries and large libraries, state libraries and regional library networks. Rural, urban, and suburban libraries are all represented. A wide variety of community programs and means to carry them out are described. The texts of the letters are available on a World Wide Web site at the University of Michigan School of Information (http://www.si.umich.edu/CLR).

From among these letters, the Council’s Kellogg Program Advisory Committee selected 12 sites for further study and site visits. In the selection process, the Advisory Committee looked for the following: models for emulation, examples of both large and small libraries, projects that have been implemented, programs with community impact, technologically sophisticated programs, successful or significant investments that should be highlighted, programs that encourage diversity, collaboration among libraries and community organizations, and projects that are coordinated and integrated within the overall library program.

Council staff members visited the 12 libraries to gather information about library technology programs and their impact on the community. From the visits and information supplied by the libraries, Council staff have written the case studies that follow and an essay that documents commonalities among programs, challenges, and lessons learned. Through the case studies, the analysis, and subsequent publications derived from this information, the Council hopes to provide inspiration and direction to library directors and to call attention to public libraries that are serving their communities effectively.

The case studies tell only a partial story of what is taking place in public libraries. The sample is limited and by no means scientific. These 12 libraries represent a very small fraction of the thousands of public libraries in the United States that are using information technology in innovative ways. These 12 also are among the libraries that are now predicting their communities’ future information needs and planning how they might respond effectively. By eschewing a scientific sampling, the Advisory Committee paid no particular attention to the geographic distribution of sites across the country or to the particular size of libraries, even though the selected libraries represent an interesting mixture of urban and rural, large and small, city and town, individual libraries and systems.

The case studies have been prepared by the Council’s staff, and in each instance a draft narrative was sent to the library under consideration for review and comment. The opinions expressed in the case studies are those of the Council on Library Resources alone. More detailed information about the services and systems of these 12 libraries may be obtained directly from the individual library or, in most cases, from the library’s World Wide Web site. Comments or questions about this project should be directed to The Council on Library Resources, at the address noted on the inside front cover.

> The Council on Library Resources is a non-profit operating foundation established in 1956 to look toward the future on behalf of libraries, address problems experienced by libraries in the aggregate, and identify innovative solutions. The Council promotes research, organizes conferences, issues publications, and manages collaborative projects to bring about significant changes in its areas of interest. It is supported by grants from other foundations, and it has recently affiliated with the Commission on Preservation and Access, an allied organization working to ensure the preservation of the published and documentary record in all formats. The Council’s current programs are in three areas important to the future of libraries: developing leadership for managing new information technologies, analyzing the economics of information services, and assisting the transition from the traditional to the digital library. The W.K. Kellogg Foundation was established in 1930 to “help people to help themselves.” As a private grantmaking organization, it provides seed money to organizations and institutions that have identified problems and designed constructive action programs aimed at solutions. Most Foundation grants are awarded in the areas of youth, leadership, philanthropy and volunteerism, community-based health services, higher education, foods systems, rural development, groundwater resources in the Great Lakes area, and economic development in Michigan. Programming priorities concentrate grants in the United States, Latin America and the Caribbean, and southern Africa.

# Twelve Case Studies: Analysis

## Analysis of the Case Studies
Dramatic developments are taking place in public libraries across the country–developments that are altering how libraries deliver information and interact with communities. As the information revolution sweeps not only across the nation, but around the world, public libraries have a unique opportunity to harness new technologies to provide resources that were unimaginable a few years ago. The Internet as a communications medium and World Wide Web technology are serving as links to bring people and communities together. But technology alone is not enough. In many regions, cities, and towns, it is the public library that stands as the community’s information nexus.

With networked communications technology, libraries’ horizons have expanded, but also challenges have multiplied. The Council on Library Resources, which for more than 40 years has identified library issues and developed new approaches to library operations, is interested in addressing the challenges public libraries face in an era of information revolution. Through a grant from the W.K. Kellogg Foundation, the Council has established a program to study innovation in the use of information technology by public libraries to serve local communities. At the recommendation of the Council’s Kellogg Program Advisory Committee, the Council’s staff asked libraries to describe how they were serving their communities through technology. From the responses, the Advisory Committee selected 12 sites to study. Teams from the Council staff visited the sites; talked to directors, library staff, and users; and prepared case studies to describe how these libraries are working in and with their communities in the new era of electronic information. In this essay, Council staff present an analysis of findings in the case studies.

## The Case Studies-General Observations
A case study is not a fully documented depiction of an organization. These 12 case studies represent the Council teams’ attempt to capture what they witnessed and learned on-site, supplemented by printed and Web information. The central theme in each story is the use of technology to expand and enhance the public library’s ability to serve the community’s needs. The studies illustrate how a few public libraries have articulated a vision and recruited other parts of the community to join them in providing new opportunities for the whole. These library efforts have not been without conflict or pain, and their effects are yet to be evaluated for the most part. But all began with a vision for the future.

Most importantly, we discovered that public libraries are continuing to serve important community functions, but that the future of these institutions is not assured. Many variables are at work in the public library sphere, including the uncertainties of funding, the costs of building and maintaining a digital telecommunications infrastructure, the increasing number and variety of information providers within communities, the rapidly changing nature of the technology itself, and the need for training library staffs and the public they serve. Quite fittingly, the final years of the twentieth century represent endings and beginnings for public libraries. The future of public libraries as we know them today cannot be assumed, for the roles they will play in the next millennium are not yet known. Moreover, these roles may take a variety of shapes and sizes–some of which have begun to evolve from the familiar past, and others of which have yet to be revealed.

In traveling to these libraries, we learned that there are no universal solutions for using information technology to serve communities or to provide greater public access to information. One common denominator, however, did emerge: The most vibrant public libraries look to the community at large to determine appropriate goals and objectives, and to partnerships with individuals and organizations in the community to carry out the objectives. There are other common components. In each example, these libraries have leadership with vision, common values about open and equitable access to information, funding (in relative terms) to create a new environment using information technologies, and community-centered strategies for making a transition into the increasingly digital information world.

Beyond these fundamental conditions and values, the libraries show a wide range of responses to the challenge of how to use technology innovatively and effectively. Each of the 12 libraries has its own story to tell, and the 12 stories are as different as the communities they serve. But innovation in the use of technology, we found, is a relative term. These case studies feature a sampling of innovative electronic services in public libraries in early 1996. If these studies are taken as a barometer of innovation in service, public libraries are only beginning to take advantage of the range of capabilities of networked information technology.

## Serving Communities
Serving the local community has been the focus of the mission of the public library for years. As long as basic financial support is local, this focus on local needs will continue to drive public library services. How libraries determine local needs and how they respond to those needs varies widely.

The libraries we studied are located in communities that range from 15,000 to 2.5 million people. Common to all is a commitment by the library to the local community, not simply as an organization that provides information, but as a cultural and educational center. We heard what library staff and management said about their technological initiatives, but what we saw was far broader in scope. They are transforming their institutions to meet the needs of the future while keeping themselves grounded in traditional community library services and practices. In all cases, management and staff have positioned these libraries as important community centers. They have seen an opportunity to use technology to provide services to members of the community in new ways, even through it has meant substantial investments in computers and telecommunications infrastructure, software and electronic publications, and training initiatives. Library services in these cases are offered based on an assessment of community need–whether the assessment was documented through a strategic planning process or less formal means of discovery. Understanding community and translating community needs into objectives for library service have placed some of the libraries in a strategic position of readiness to take advantage of funding opportunities as they come along. These planning efforts have been meaningful for institutions large and small, with or without the development staffs or administrative infrastructure to seek and manage large grant-funded projects. We observed that libraries’ knowledge of the community and proactive planning efforts helped to ready them to use technology to reach new and larger audiences, and to address community needs by serving these audiences in new ways.

## Need for Vision
Public libraries became ubiquitous features of the North American landscape when Andrew Carnegie donated money to thousands of communities for the construction of library buildings in the last years of the nineteenth century and the first 15 years of the twentieth century. The deal he struck required local governments to cover the cost of books and staff. Carnegie believed access to books and education would provide opportunities for motivated workers to improve their minds, and in the process, their economic conditions.

What would be a comparable contribution to American people today? If Carnegie were alive, would he connect every home to the Information Superhighway? Would he fund one virtual library, which the nation could access through the Internet and the World Wide Web? Would he invest in community-based information networks or Free-nets? Or, would he equip libraries to provide electronic information from inside or outside the library, wiring the old Carnegie library buildings for tomorrow’s technology? Would he build new branch library buildings to serve expanding urban and suburban populations? These questions are not fanciful but are aimed at the very heart of the question about the role of the public library. Is it a place where information resides or a conduit for information, or both?

The public library has been, and continues to be, both of these things and more. The debate about roles is important, however, because municipal or other local funding for public libraries is not likely to increase, at least, not in the current political and economic climate. More and more, public libraries must make difficult choices or seek external funds to pay for new programs. And the financial requirements for connecting community members to the Information Superhighway are immense. As they seek resources, library leaders are finding themselves in new and unprecedented relationships with public and private funding agencies of all kinds. Public library administrators have to make a clear and direct case for their institutions, and they must take the lead in articulating a vision of what the public library can mean to a community in the twenty-first century.

The libraries highlighted in the case studies are doing just that. The leaders of these 12 possess vision and know how to articulate it: Once articulated, the vision is implemented and refined by the entire staff, community leaders and supporters, volunteers, and institutional partners.

## Common Values
One great advantage of public libraries is their neutrality within communities. They are public spaces that offer a place to learn on one’s own about any subject and without review by an authority figure. The library staff need not be consulted or involved in the pursuit of knowledge unless the patron wishes. Carnegie referred to the public library as the “people’s university,” and this conceptualization of the institution has continued in the public’s mind over the years. The collections in libraries allow for anonymous and unfettered inquiries into all subjects, and unlike a school, the public library has no predetermined curriculum or pedagogy. Individual curiosity and time are the only limitations on the knowledge that can be acquired. The neutral space has another advantage: It is available to individuals of all socioeconomic groups and all ages. The no-questions-asked policy makes it possible for anyone in the community to take advantage of the library’s services. The success of some library-centered community development projects we saw was attributed in part to the neutral and accessible position of the library within the community. The principle of open access for all to information has remained a steadfast conviction in the 12 libraries we visited as in thousands of public libraries around the country, even when that ideal is tempered somewhat by community standards and budget. For the most part, all library services in these sites have been offered without charge to members of the community, but in those few instances when charges have been levied, the services have been offered equitably to one and all. This attribute has distinguished public library service in the United States for the last 100 years. We observed library managers and staff within the 12 libraries working vigorously to perpetuate library traditions of free and equitable access to information within the electronic environment, even though the actual costs of information and access are not readily apparent to the public and have never been “free.”

## Evolving Roles
For decades, public libraries have played a wide variety of roles within their communities, but the availability of electronic information and interactive communications technologies has enabled them to take on more and increasingly complex roles. Public libraries assume roles that make sense for the local communities. For example, across the nation libraries function as independent learning centers, popular materials centers, community information centers, preschoolers’ door to learning, research centers, cultural centers, and homework centers for youth. Libraries participating in the evolution to new forms of service through technology point out that much of the public has not understood the number or variety of roles the library has played in the past, and they point with some frustration to the number of new roles they should and could take on in the digital age if adequate resources were available. Library leaders are concerned, generally, that the expectations of the community for libraries and their own expectations for these institutions are greater than the resources will accommodate. In some places, librarians have expressed concern that digital library initiatives are usurping disproportionate resources when compared to the full range of services the library provides. Other librarians have cast such concerns aside and embrace the future that the digital world seems to be promising.

Although librarians talk a great deal about the new services they are providing, it may be that so far they are taking advantage of technology to enlarge and improve traditional services or to customize services that previously had been more generic. In delivering these new or enhanced services, are libraries playing new or significantly changed roles within their communities? For example, in sites we visited libraries have served as catalysts in community development, problem solvers for community organizations, or coordinators of community information delivery. In some communities these roles would be described as merely new names or extensions of what they have been doing all along. With electronic information and a community telecommunications infrastructure, there are many possibilities. It remains to be seen whether totally new roles for the public library will evolve as the technology evolves. The more important evolution may be library leadership’s own broadening vision of the potential roles libraries might play within their communities. At any rate, from our site visits we learned that technology is enabling libraries to take on roles and carry out tasks in ways that are more visible to the public and that the librarians themselves believe will be more effective.

## The Challenge of Partnerships
Although libraries for many years have joined with other libraries to increase the efficiency and decrease the cost of information delivery, public libraries have turned to new types of partnerships to help broaden their resource base and reach more deeply into the community. What is changing is that these libraries are forging alliances and partnerships with organizations many of which have not, until now, been central to the workings of public libraries. Further, these partnerships involve organizations on an operational level in relationships that are more complex and often more mutually beneficial than that of funder and grantee. Such partnerships are making new and enhanced services a reality. Libraries are collaborating with telecommunications and corporate partners, new types of libraries, community organizations and agencies, schools, and others to provide new services, increase public access to information, and create community-based information resources. The collaborations have helped libraries establish new constituencies and build wider support (and even, in some cases, broaden and diversify the sources of funding). The challenge is to find partners who share the vision and who have the resources to invest in that vision.

The case study partnerships have been dynamic and varied–as varied as the libraries’ sizes and locales. In sites we visited, these alliances among libraries at regional or state levels have been and are increasingly important to the local library because the cooperative networking, training, and purchasing projects of these alliances are making information technology more affordable on the local level. On our visits we have seen public libraries join forces with their local telephone companies or cable television providers to take advantage of fiber optic network installation. Others have looked to nearby universities and colleges for technical expertise and networking experience. Libraries have benefited from alliances with local school systems, administrations, or individual schools. In one example, the public library has put together an alliance that includes a publicly owned utility company, the mayor’s office, a local university, and the community chamber of commerce. One urban area has reaped particular benefits from a partnership with a large bank and other corporate sponsors; a rural library received its first computer terminal as a donation from the local bank. Two libraries have partnerships with commercial information system developers to work collaboratively in the development of new or enhanced products for libraries. The point is that the partnerships–in whatever form they take–have proven to be advantageous for those public libraries that have pursued them with vigor and diligence and with a certain creative imagination.

Some librarians, not accustomed to forging alliances, particularly with the corporate sector, have expressed concerns about demands that might be placed on them by the new partnerships. Most, however, have embraced the new alliances with enthusiasm and the hope that the partnerships will increase opportunities and programs. Partnerships generally require more work than anyone ever forecasts or readily acknowledges. But in looking to the future, public library leadership has identified partnerships as a way, despite all the uncertainties and risks, to make their vision of the future possible.

## Libraries and Community-based Information Networks

Providing information to meet the needs of community members is not new, but libraries are working in less-familiar territory as they collaborate with a range of organizations to develop a network of information from many different information providers. Although public libraries have gathered and made available information about their local communities, the public was little aware of this activity until the advent of community-based information systems delivered in electronic form. In addition to simply gathering information, many public librarians see themselves as adding value to this information. Many are applying traditional library approaches to adding value and information in electronic form. Some of the libraries have organized or indexed the information created by other organizations to make it more useful, and made it accessible as a logical component of the local library system. A few have customized these resources by linking to them from logical places on their homepages on the World Wide Web. Many of the sites have carefully selected electronic resources that correspond to the interests and needs of the various segments of the community. Other libraries have geared their efforts not only toward increasing public access to this information, but toward making sure that the underrepresented and the underprivileged in their communities have the means to access it as well. In most cases, however, the electronic services provided mirror the services libraries have long provided. But more needs to be done to take advantage of the interactive capabilities of the technology that will enhance communication and facilitate problem-solving with and among segments of the community.

Libraries are accomplishing their community-based goals in many different ways. In some instances, the library system and the community-based information system (community network or Free-net) are not directly connected. Although they may serve related or overlapping missions, they may be financed and managed as separate organizations. This may reflect some libraries placing a higher value on retaining autonomy than on taking the risks involved with nurturing creative partnerships. In some libraries the concern is expressed differently: They regard alliances with community networks as a kind of social service that should remain outside their realm.

Thus, not every library has viewed its future as tied to the fortunes of the local community network or Free-net. But in many places, the public library has extended the definition of itself as an information provider and has assumed a new role by adding a community-based information network or Free-net to its palette of services. There is no single answer. What has worked in some communities may not work in others. The range of types of alliances formed to provide community information are as varied as the communities they serve, and the role of the public library within each alliance varies with the style and capacity for leadership within the library.

## Staffing and Training

In every library we visited, and from conversations with many other public librarians, one of the concerns voiced most frequently is that the staff expertise needed to play a leadership role in the digital environment is not readily found among existing staff. Public libraries we visited have hired technical experts to join the staff, on occasion without a background in library and information science. Some public libraries have encouraged current staff to develop technical skills and leadership expertise; others still, in a few instances, have promoted technically proficient staff into key areas of information systems management.

All of the libraries cited the need to invest much more heavily in staff training. Practically every person on the staff of today’s public libraries needs to know more about computers, electronic resources, and working on teams, and many will need to learn about fund-raising. Although part of the necessary learning must be achieved by individual effort, the libraries recognize that they have an obligation to equip staff to work in a different kind of environment: one that fosters communication among staff at all levels, takes advantage of technology, and uses staff skills in different ways. Some libraries also have recognized that their technical experts could benefit from some training in traditional library functions and activities. The difficulty is that training budgets in public libraries have been, traditionally, very small. The need to retool the current staff is huge in comparison to the funds that can be obligated readily to this purpose. Nevertheless, these libraries are doing what they can to facilitate training, even if that means informal tutorials and exchanges of information among staff. Training is a priority in public libraries, but it may be among the hardest activities to fund, perhaps because of the difficulty of documenting and articulating in layperson’s terms its direct impact on the services received by the public.

Since many public libraries are already stretching to acquire hardware, software, and connections, as well as information in electronic form, they are not readily finding the resources to support comprehensive training. As public libraries become more familiar with technology and its uses, and as they expand their partnerships in the community, training possibilities may more easily present themselves and may be the outcome of new, innovative alliances. Nevertheless, library leaders need to be able to articulate effectively the need for training and to implement effective training strategies.

## The Need for Buildings and Space

Opinions differ, even within the library community itself, about the need for building or expanding libraries in expensive urban real estate zones, especially as the availability of networked information expands rapidly. Library staff who see community members seeking human contact in a safe, warm place and who provide desperately needed services for the community’s children see clearly a need for physical library space. They despair when technology enthusiasts speak glowingly of virtual libraries and the development of virtual communities through the Internet as an alternative. If money were not an issue, both the virtual and the physical community centers could be fully developed, staffed, maintained, and promoted.

The case study libraries are both virtual libraries and community centers. They support the philosophy that to serve communities effectively today, public libraries must be both, despite the resulting strain on resources. Building and maintaining adequate physical space to carry out library services is an important issue: Of the 12, four libraries have completed recent significant main library renovations, four others have constructed (or will construct shortly) new central library facilities, and two will go to voters this year with bond referenda for new main library buildings. In addition, three of these public libraries are building new branches to serve growing suburban or neighborhood populations. Library administrators’ ongoing concerns for sufficient, attractive, and well-maintained facilities are exacerbated by the need to wire buildings for network connections and reorganize space for delivery of electronic information. At every site, technology has required some form of refurbishing and rearranging space.

Many libraries have established public computer laboratories in their main buildings to provide access to the Internet for all–including those without the physical means of connecting to the library from home or office. Each of these libraries is committed to providing equitable access to electronic information from all library facilities including branches, but extending the full range of electronic services to branches is a steep financial and technical hurdle for multi-site library systems. These public libraries provide or have plans to provide electronic information to people who cannot visit a library building through dial-in or Internet connections. Not everyone has the means to connect to the libraries’ electronic services or visit a library facility. As a result, some libraries are creating partnerships with social service and other agencies and to install networked computers in shelters, senior citizen centers, half-way houses, recreation centers for youth, and bus terminals. Even in an era of increasing availability of networked electronic information, libraries must still confront the problems of space, buildings, and physical public access to ensure that the gateways to that electronic information are open to all.

## Conclusions
In an environment in which technology offers hope for helping society to improve itself, it is understandable that library leaders would look to technology to make their institutions more relevant to the communities they serve. There is a fortuitous confluence between the services libraries in fact have offered to their communities and the opportunities offered by electronic information and new forms of delivery. Several of the libraries we visited have crafted programs that use technology to solve the most difficult problems of the community, such as literacy programs that are based on developing computer skills while learning to read or to communicate in English. Other libraries have developed special resources for the business community, recognizing that the equipment installed for that purpose will also be useful to others for many different purposes.

There is a difficulty, however, in that the public libraries’ most well known and appreciated features have little to do with technology. When asked to comment about the value of the public library in the community, most respondents to opinion surveys and polls, including a recent survey1 and focus group conducted by the Benton Foundation for the Kellogg Foundation HRISM program, remark that the public library is the place where all citizens, without charge, can gain access to information, find recreational literature, or gather materials for children’s homework. But, there appears to be a mismatch between the mission of the library that is known and loved by the community at large and the vision of those who know about the potential of the library to serve vital needs of the local community.

Public libraries in North America are much admired by local citizens and are considered useful educational agencies and important for their services to children. The public opinion polls have confirmed this fact. These warm feelings about public libraries are found even among that segment of the population that does not generally use the public library. And this good will is also a fundamental weakness. People think of the public library as a good place for children, but they do not think in terms of the financial investment required to make the public library an important information resource in the community. Nor is the public library thought about as a leader in information policy.

The best public libraries–and these include the 12 we visited–understand that digital technology has the power to create a new or more highly evolved kind of community agency. The case studies offered here give insights into how a dozen library directors and their staffs have recognized that technology, properly applied, can strengthen and enhance a community by drawing in individuals and organizations who have not been part of the library’s family in the past. Personality and style differences of library leadership, the traditions and history of the institutions, and the make-up of the communities they serve are important factors, but the common elements among these library innovators are: community-centered strategies for library service, leadership with a vision of information technology serving the community, the ability to articulate this vision convincingly, and a belief that access to information is a fundamental right in a democratic society.

* * *

1Buildings, Books, and Bytes: Libraries and Communities in the Digital Age. A report on the public’s opinion of library leaders’ visions for the future. Prepared by the Benton Foundation. Funded by the W.K. Kellogg Foundation. \[Washington, D.C.\] November, 1996.

# Case Studies

## Brooklyn Public Library Case Study

### The Context
The Brooklyn Public Library is a cultural icon. For decades, it has stood as a symbol for bridging cultures, races, and age groups. The library teems with a diverse mix of people seeking business information, leads on securing the next job, educational computer games, an adult literacy class, or just a warm, friendly place to sit and talk with others.

A community of 2,300,664 residents, Brooklyn is the most populous of New York City’s five boroughs. It is a culturally diverse community where more than 90 languages are spoken. Increasingly, it is a borough of immigrants; 29 percent of the population is foreign born. Some 40 percent speak a language other than English at home, and for 18 percent that language is Spanish. Close to a million people are bilingual or non-English speaking. Some 64 percent of the individuals 25 years and older are high school graduates; nearly 17 percent are college graduates. The median family income is $30,033, with 514,163 persons living below the poverty level.1

Brooklyn Library managers view their institution as a traditional public library and describe their mission as supporting the public’s information, recreation, and hobby needs. Within this environment, CDs, videos and CD-ROMs circulate, cookbook collections grow, and a carefully stocked and visually appealing job information center is always busy. Staff members report especially high use among senior citizens and children. The library reflects the diversity of the population by purchasing collection materials in 60 languages. The system provides services at a main library, 58 branches, and a special business library. Also, Brooklyn is the only system in New York City that operates a bookmobile. In 1994, the library collection included 4,655,894 items, the library circulated 9,494,209 items, and staff answered 6,796,946 reference questions. In 1994, the library received support of $21.23 per capita. The library is unusual in that it is a private nonprofit corporation, an independent organization within the city. According to the library director, this means that there is no higher body to blame. The library must solve its own problems and establish and administer its own policies.

### Accomplishments


Although the library has been less aggressive than some other public libraries in adopting new technology, there have been some notable technical accomplishments:

*   The Brooklyn Public Library has been most innovative in using technology to support individuals’ learning in formal literacy training and after-school programs for children.
*   In a system in which customized branch services are highly important in serving local needs, the library has established a twelve-station computer laboratory in the Flatbush Branch to experiment with open patron access to information technology and Internet resources at the branch level.
*   The library has begun to develop a system-wide information infrastructure in a community environment where there are no large commercial or educational organizations identified as partners. The library will use a Brooklyn Public Library World Wide Web homepage as a catalyst to network electronically with other Brooklyn institutions.

Managers are committed to the concept of library buildings as important places for their public. A recent survey by the library showed that customers value the space as well. Warm in winter and cool in summer, library buildings supply a welcome haven for the many people of Brooklyn who live in close quarters. Branches throughout the system serve large numbers of school-age children after school because their parents have come to trust the library as a safe place.

### Technology

The new library director, Martin Gomez, expresses his desire for the library to take a leadership role within Brooklyn but more specifically to exploit the potential of information technology to bring people together to solve community problems. The board recognizes that virtual community can be as powerful as physical community. “Automation is our number one priority,” the director says. “We have to promote the theme of using information technology for the benefit of the public.” This message is often repeated to City Council members, foundations, local businesses, and the library board. Many library managers and employees in public service positions talk about his philosophy with open appreciation. They express willingness to take on the challenges of the information technologies they have seen and heard so much about. Many express support, almost relief, that the director has lifted automation to the highest priority. Articulating widely and often the need for developing an automation infrastructure paid off recently. The library has secured $2 million from the borough president and $1.5 million from the City Council to complete a system upgrade in fiscal years 1997 and 1998.

The staff indicates that until the arrival of Gomez in September 1995, the Brooklyn Public Library had been somewhat slow to implement automated library services. Technology had been introduced in small steps that could be taken without broad-based administrative support or technical infrastructure; several small-scale projects were initiated within a single department or building. A few staff members noted, however, that being behind the curve of cutting-edge technology has the advantage of allowing the library to learn from others’ experience. For example, learning from libraries in other boroughs, Brooklyn will choose to configure workstations with a different complement of services for different places or purposes, rather than expecting a single model of workstation to do everything.

Thanks to an active fund-raising program, the library has received several small grants to enable, among other things, the building of a local area network for the main library, purchase of software and equipment for the three literacy “Learning Centers,” and installation of a local area network for the business library. Recent grants have enabled the business library to offer a focused collection of print and electronic resources for small businesses and to make reference service available by an 800 number to New York state residents beyond the local telephone dialing area.

Because efforts to automate have largely been made piecemeal by individual initiative, the library has developed several independent systems. Over the past few years, the library has created a bibliographic database in electronic form and is using an online circulation system throughout the library system. Currently, the library’s public access catalog is pressed on CD-ROM disks and made available at public workstations through a Bibliofile system. The library is now poised to take the next step of providing an integrated online catalog system at all library buildings.

The library staff has begun to experiment with Internet access for reference and professional use, and the main library local area network will soon be upgraded to allow the public to gain access to the Internet. A special grant from the Microsoft Corporation and the Public Library Association’s Libraries Online! program has enabled the library to offer public access to the Internet at terminals in the Flatbush branch. In its plans for other branches, the library will emphasize the equitable spread of technology, providing a few workstations in as many of its branches as possible rather than concentrating resources in a few branches at a time.

#### Learning and Technology

Library managers believe it is important to add value to the information they provide by teaching people not only how to find it but also how to use it. The library’s current emphasis on developing technology supports one of the library’s highest priorities–serving learners. At the turn of the twentieth century, the Brooklyn Public Library was well known for its in-house English classes for immigrants. Today, literacy efforts continue to flourish at the Brooklyn Public Library at least in part because the library offers resources and instruction with no value judgments. Some 700 students are now enrolled in adult literacy instruction that has evolved from a phonics-based, one-on-one tutoring program to group methods that rely heavily upon computer technology. Students develop basic reading, writing, problem solving, and critical-thinking skills by using the same word processing, database, or spreadsheet software that they might find in a work setting. Students may sign up to use the literacy computer center any time, seven days a week. Within a more specialized family literacy program, adult learners find out how to select children’s books and use interactive reading strategies to share these books with their children. Using this approach, adult learners become the conveyors of reading and learning for their children.

The literacy classes are supported by New York City rather than by library funds. The literacy program operates within the Library’s Program Development Office, managed by veteran librarian Susan O’Connor, who says, “The library really supports education.” Listening to O’Connor speak, one begins to understand how a variety of public library services to learners of all ages have benefited from the library’s highly developed experience with innovative educational methods and computer technology that enables learners.

Another learning program, the Kids Connection, is an ongoing, after-school public library program for children. Science and career-related interactive video laser disc programs are being placed in branches where librarians are willing to try something new to provide more effective learning experiences for the large after-school student population. The librarians believe that children enjoy learning, and they are determined to place interesting and visually attractive educational materials in children’s hands. Within the library’s Education and Job Information Center a series of stand-alone terminals offers access to numerous job and career databases and related online or CD-ROM resources. Seeing people waiting patiently to be the next to use one or another database underlined how useful a networked approach to delivering the tools would be within the center, throughout the library’s facilities, and beyond.

#### Technology Directions

Library management recognizes that technology will not be as effective as it should be unless there is a plan for utilizing it. Individual efforts have been useful, but they need to be replaced by a system-wide effort. In order to ensure that library-wide goals for technology are addressed and that a higher level of technology integration is achieved, an office of library systems integration has been established. The director of this office, Mary Beth Beidl, describes the automation strategy as having two phases. Phase one is implementing access to a central integrated online public access catalog, as well as building a local area network (LAN) within each physical building that will deliver the same general reference tools to all branches. Connections among the LANs will rely on frame relay, because little fiber optic cable is in place in Brooklyn. Phase two would design a complement of online information resources tailored to each branch and delivered on the branch’s local area network. The current thinking of library managers is that information resources will be purchased or leased by branches to reflect the language and ethnic heritages represented in the branch population. Local content will be developed to serve branch needs but also will be accessible across the branches to the wider Brooklyn Public Library community. Each branch will have access to the online catalog and some system-wide resources but also will load resources at each branch that make sense for the local constituency. In addition, access to the electronic resources will be offered through dial-up.

Beidl emphasizes the need for a plan because the plan articulates the strategy for the vision, but she also notes the danger of being too wedded to details. Library management believes that technology is changing too rapidly to accommodate the long-term systematic planning to which librarians are accustomed. Particularly because the library is behind many of its peer institutions in offering networked information services, the librarians recognize the need to seek opportunities to secure external funds that will help the library move forward. The timing and sequence of activity may not always be the most desirable from a planning perspective, but no opportunity should be avoided or missed. The plan can always be restructured if it supports the vision.

#### Serving the Community through Branches

Library staff’s dedication to making each of the 58 branches community-based is evident, and this extends to most branches having their own Friends of the Library group. The library profiles each branch for collection development and program development. Also, the choice of which languages are supported is branch-specific. These branch-level decisions are based on census information, although observations between censuses are needed because the ethnic nature of the local communities is changing rapidly. The refurbishing of buildings is done on an ongoing basis, with three or four of the branches being refurbished at any one time. The system-wide plan for technology includes a plan for wiring each branch as it is refurbished. City Council members are consulted in making these plans. They respond to efforts to upgrade branches in their district and are pleased and responsive when a renovation is finished or technology is installed.

At the branch level, library staff are making new and renewed efforts to serve the community. For the Brooklyn Public Library, the most visible experiments have been made at the Flatbush branch. The coordinator of outreach programs for this branch, who was hired with grant funds, has made vigorous efforts to connect the library and the community. With a community outreach coordinator and a revived Friends of the Flatbush Library, more local groups have begun to hold meetings in branch library space. Library staff report that the number of library cards issued and total circulation have increased as the number of meetings has increased. Full network connections and a computer laboratory with 12 workstations have been installed with a grant from Microsoft and the Public Library Association (PLA). In the first unadvertised days of availability, workstations were always in use with even previously demanding patrons waiting patiently for a chance to surf the Internet and try the networked Microsoft software. The effort to bring technology to Flatbush seems more a result of seizing an opportunity than strategic planning. Counter to prevailing library philosophies of tailoring collections and services to local constituencies, the Flatbush branch has installed a set of Microsoft software the company was willing to give away, albeit with some titles in French translation to serve Haitian and Creole populations in Flatbush. The relationship to ongoing programs is not strategic but may well evolve with the project. The most promising indicator is the excitement exhibited by the community activists for the technology.

#### Technical Infrastructure

The Brooklyn Public Library’s automated circulation system runs on a Sequent SE/30 computer connected to 236 terminals over a low-speed wide-area network. The terminals are distributed throughout the central library and the 58 branches. The library makes its catalog available to the public on a Bibliofile CD-ROM system at 250 catalog work stations distributed throughout the branches and the central library.

A public access local area network (LAN) in the central library connects five workstations and provides reference databases and indexes on CD-ROM, including newspaper indexes from UMI and Newsbank. A second public access LAN will open in the central library in October 1996 with 12 Gateway Pentium workstations providing Internet access, word processing, and multimedia applications. The Business Library has a public access CD-ROM LAN which connects seven public access workstations and has a remote dial-in capability. The LAN at the Flatbush Branch has 12 public access workstations. Additional LANs are planned for the branches.

In addition to the networked work stations mentioned above, the library has about 30 public access work stations in the central library and 83 throughout the branches. 20 are available in the children’s service areas. With the exception of about eight Macintoshes, they are all 486 machines used to provide reference databases and multimedia applications. Periodical indexes and full-text articles on EBSCO’s Academic Abstracts CD-ROM product, for example, run on 16 of these stand-alone workstations in the central library and also in 40 branches. The Literacy Program has 25 public access Macintoshes in its training centers. The Library has a computer staff training center with ten workstations at the Pacific Branch.

The Library uses T1 and fractional T1 (128KB and 384KB) connections to connect from each facility to the local Internet provider. By the end of October 1996, the library will have a total of 30 public access Internet workstations with full graphical capability.

### Challenges
The staff of the Brooklyn Public Library has a strong commitment to the library as a place. It has an equally strong commitment to public service. Consequently, staff members are eager to provide electronic resources to the members of their community. They are less sure about the desirability of making networked resources available to individuals’ homes. They seem somewhat apprehensive about taking any steps that would put distance between the librarian and the user. They seem uncomfortable, too, with any plan that would further separate the privileged and the underprivileged users. Thus far, at least, the library’s leadership envisions that technology will be installed in the main and branch libraries and that citizens of the community will come to one of the buildings or dial in to use it. This will further position the library as the public access point for community information. Several of the librarians remarked that the changes in use patterns will be monitored closely as technology is installed sequentially across the branches. They hypothesize that individuals beyond the normal boundaries served by a particular branch may begin to frequent the library facility that provides electronic access.

Library managers find themselves making policy “on the fly” because the world in which they now operate is so different from the print-based world. Many decisions are made for them by public utilities, vendors, or external funders, and this breeds a sense of uncertainty not present in earlier days. They are also finding it harder to communicate within the system. Until now, most of the branches have operated relatively independently. Managers chose the materials they thought members of the community would find useful. Today, because providing access without owning the material is a central feature of librarianship, they are discovering a certain interdependence within the system. Consequently, the library staff is forced to improve its methods of communicating across the system. In the area of technology purchases, the library has uncovered a need for increased standardization and centralized review before purchase. The goal is systems integration, which means considering the impact of each purchase on the whole library. Technology decision making had been decentralized until recently. A new office of systems integration should help not only with coordination but also with communication across departmental lines and buildings.

Library managers also note the need to think differently about hiring new staff. Although the MLS degree is still valued, the managers realize that many of the technical skills needed are more readily found in young technology enthusiasts. The decision to hire such individuals requires a different mindset among library managers. It also creates the need for in-house training that socializes the technical specialists into the profession of librarianship and makes librarians at home with the techies. Because the library director recognizes that the institution’s success will rely increasingly on external funding, he believes it will be essential to add staff people to do development and government relations work.

Technology training for staff is an ongoing concern. In 1996, in a little-used but centrally located branch, the library opened a computer technology center. The center, which includes classroom space and equipment, has been renovated for use in staff training. The library is using a commercial firm at first for standard office applications and plans eventually to develop in-house instructional expertise for library applications. Library management recognizes that this will almost certainly mean hiring another specialty into the ranks.

Already, the library realizes that technological change is forcing the institution to work differently. For example, government information, which has been a heavily used resource at Brooklyn Public, is now being published in electronic form. Consequently, the Government Printing Office (GPO) has been a catalyst for technology change. Government documents are now available on the Internet, as well as on CD-ROM. The staff, without significant training, cannot fully use or make them available. Brooklyn Public is anxious to keep its status as a depository library. Since some GPO resources are provided only online via the Internet, the library must determine how to make them available even though Internet access is not available in all branches. Social science reference librarians long for more mini-CD-ROM changers for viewing census data on stand-alone workstations so that the discs do not take up valuable space on the main library’s CD-ROM network. Eventually, the information will all be online, but this method of access requires an infrastructure not now available to the library system.

#### The Future

The legacy of the Brooklyn Public Library is an important asset for the staff. The library has deep cultural and educational meaning in the diverse communities that make up the borough of Brooklyn. Staff and management will need to think carefully about the ways that technology can be used to strengthen and enhance the basic mission. The social service dimension of the library is not insignificant; thus, the librarians are, for good reason, concerned about maintaining the library as a community place.

Some shifts are already evident. With literacy learning through technology, the library has moved to very different methods of providing instruction. With the main library’s networked CD-ROM resources and plans for library-wide online access to traditional catalog and indexing resources, the library is carrying out the same mission and the same services through new media. With the investment in interactive laser disks for children and workstations with public Internet access, the library offers new levels of service and takes advantage of opportunity. Time will tell whether these latter tools and others yet to be developed will serve the ongoing mission in the same ways as before or open new possibilities for community service.

The Brooklyn Public Library has strong experience in applying computer software in a learning environment, especially through its literacy programs, and has built on more than 20 years of experience with the interrelated fields of education and employment through its Education and Jobs Information Center. These resources and the knowledge of community at the neighborhood level will serve the library well as it builds the technical infrastructure required to pursue the library director’s vision of the Brooklyn Public Library as a community leader.

* * *

1 Demographic data from Selected Employment and Commutation Characteristics–Brooklyn, NY, 1990 Summary Tape.

From the publication Public Libraries, Communities, and Technology: Twelve Case Studies, published by The Council on Library Resources, ©1996. For more information contact  
The Council on Library Resources, 1400 16th Street NW,  
Suite 715, Washington DC, 20036. Phone (202) 939-3370. Fax (202) 939-3499.





